# The C programming language-2

## Pointers

> Pointers should be the most annoying part in C/C++. In other languages, such as Java, Python, there is no such things, so they are easier to understand. However, it is actually a very interesting part of C/C++. Here I will not go through in details since I have learned about it years ago.

So, how do we define the term, ___pointer___?

Memory: a small number of **registers**(on CPU chips), and **main memory**(outside CPU chips).  

When the CPU wants to fetch a value from a particular location in main memory, it must supply an address: a 32-bit or 64-bit unsigned integer on typical current architectures, referring to one of up to $2^32$ or $2^64$ distinct 8-bit locations in the memory. These integers can be manipulated like any other integer; in C, they appear as **pointers**, a family of types that can be passed as arguments, stored in variables, returned from functions, etc.



### Pointers and Arrays

`*` is the **deference** operator, inverse of the **address-of**(`&`) operator.

**Arrays and Pointers**: The array name acts like a constant pointer to the zeroth element of the array. So `*(a+n)` is equivalent to `a[n]`(or even `n[a]`, but you'd better not do this). Note that C does not do any **bound checking**, so you should be careful about such **buffer overruns**.



### Variable-length Arrays

C99 support variable-length array and for some time I really liked to use it. However, as a general programming practice it is **extremely dangerous**, though it sometimes could simplify your code by avoiding `malloc` and `free`. Variable-length array allocations are typically allocated on the stack, and will not report failure. Also, `gdb` is confused by two-dimensional variable-length arrays



### malloc/calloc

`malloc`: to build data structures at run time that have unpredictable (perhaps even changing) sizes and that are intended to persist longer than the functions that create them. 

`calloc`: you don't have to do the multiplication yourself, and it is guaranteed that the allocated data is initialized to zeros.

`realloc`:  to re-allocate an old block



### Function pointer

> It is what I did not learn before. Actually when I was learning C, I skipped that part since I thought it is not that useful.

```c
/* Functional "hello world" program */

#include <stdio.h>

int
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    /* function for emitting text */
    int (*say)(const char *);

    say = puts;

    say("hello world");

    return 0;
}
```

A **callback** is when we pass a function pointer into a function so that that function can call our function when some event happens or it needs to compute something.

A classic example is the comparison argument to `qsort`, from the standard library:

```c
/* defined in stdlib.h */
void 
qsort(
    void *base, 
    size_t n, 
    size_t size,
    int (*cmp)(const void *key1, const void *key2)
);
```



### Restrict keyword

check [here](http://cs.yale.edu/homes/aspnes/classes/223/notes.html#The_restrict_keyword)



## String

Two string constants separated only by whitespace will be concatenated by the compiler as a single constant: `"foo" "bar"` is the same as `"foobar"`. This feature is not much used in normal code, but shows up sometimes in [macros](http://cs.yale.edu/homes/aspnes/classes/223/notes.html#macros).

The problem with string constants is that you can't modify them. If you want to build strings on the fly, you will need to allocate space for them. The traditional approach is to use a **buffer**, an array of `char`s.  A better approach is to use `malloc` and `realloc`.



## Macros

### Conditional Compiling

Like regular C `if` statements, `#ifdef` and `#ifndef` directives can be nested, and can include else cases, which are separated by an `#else` directive.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <assert.h>

int
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
#ifdef SAY_HI
    puts("Hi.");
#else  /* matches #ifdef SAY_HI */
#ifndef BE_POLITE
    puts("Go away!");
#else  /* matches #ifndef BE_POLITE */
    puts("I'm sorry, I don't feel like talking today.");
#endif /* matches #ifndef BE_POLITE */
#endif /* matches #ifdfe SAY_HI */

#ifdef DEBUG_ARITHMETIC
    assert(2+2 == 5);
#endif

    return 0;
}
```

You can turn these conditional compilation directives on and off at compile time by passing the `-D`flag to `gcc`. Here is the program above, running after compiling with different choices of options:

```shell
$ gcc -DSAY_HI -o ifdef ifdef.c
$ ./ifdef
Hi.
$ gcc -DBE_POLITE -DDEBUG_ARITHMETIC -o ifdef ifdef.c
$ ./ifdef
I'm sorry, I don't feel like talking today.
ifdef: ifdef.c:18: main: Assertion `2+2 == 5' failed.
Aborted
```

An example of how this mechanism can be useful is the `NDEBUG` macro: if you define this before including `assert.h`, it turns every `assert` in your code into a no-op. This can be handy if you are pretty sure your code works and you want to speed it up in its final shipped version, or if you are pretty sure your code doesn't work but you want to hide the evidence. (It also means you should not perform side-effects inside an `assert` unless you are happy with them not happening.)



Using the flag `-DNAME` defines `NAME` to be `1`. If you want something else, use `-DNAME=VALUE`. This can be used to bake useful information into your program at compile time, and is often used to specify filenames. Below is a simple example.

```
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
#ifdef MESSAGE
    puts(MESSAGE);
#endif

    return 0;
}
```

examples/macros/message.c

```shell
$ gcc -DMESSAGE='"Hi there!"' -o message message.c
$ ./message
Hi there!
```

